
=====
Intro
=====

This book is about keeping things simple. There are couple of
principles that I want to preserve in this book. Let me tell you about
them right now, since I don't feel like repeating myself ever
again. So this is the only page in which I will discuss these
principles. In fact, that is the very first principle. 

.. pull-quote:: 

   Everything is discussed only once.

That's all very nice, but it would not be very helpful if you wouldn't
know where to start. If you would plunge in halfway and stumble across
something you never saw before, how would you know in which direction
to page in order to find the answer? That calls for another principle.

.. pull-quote::

   It should be possible to completely understand a topic given
   everything that has been discussed before. (And with 'before', I
   mean pages before the current page.)

â€¦and even that would be of little use, if it weren't for another
principle:

.. pull-quote::
   
   Things are going to be introduced one by one.

I think we are moving in the right direction now. However, if I would
only have the principles outlined above, I still don't think I would
really appreciate the book I am writing. The book I would love to read
would tell me immediately what I could do to play around with the
thing introduced. And I don't want to download code. It should be
possible to get going right away, with only the smallest collection of
tools possible. That's quite a few principles in a single go. Like:

.. pull-quote::

   Everything introduced should be illustrated with a simple, small
   and isolated example.

And another one that is not quite so obvious as you might think:

.. pull-quote::

   The purpose of the example should not be to illustrate how clever I
   am.

That one is going to be easy, since I am not that clever at all. 

.. pull-quote::

   It should be possible to get a sense of what it means by typing as
   little lines of code as possible.

Now, the last principle may sound a little hard to achieve. And for
sure, it may be a little challenging at times. But Scala is considered
to be a language that allows you to say a whole a lot in just a few
lines, so I think we'll get there eventually. 

So, if I am going to feed you new stuff in an incremental way, and
never introduce something you haven't seen before, it also means we
will start with the simplest thing that you can imagine. We will start
from zero. And from that, we will slowly increase our understanding of
the language, bit by bit, in a very much exploratory way. I am
basically going to take the stance of somebody who doesn't know Scala
at all, and take it from there. 

In order to be able to start from zero, you will at least need to have
Scala installed. So if you haven't done so yet, please install it
now. 




